new post about lazy encoding (#198)
reason-association/reasonml.org: _blogposts/compiler/a-story-of-lazy-encoding.mdx

---
author: hongbo
date: "2020-05-15 18:00" 
previewImg:
category: compiler
title: New Lazy Encoding in BuckleScript
description: |

>   Highlights of our newest changes to the internal representation of exceptions

Reviewer: This is the old description... needs a different tagline of similar size

  and how it will provide better stacktraces to our users.

> canonical: https://bucklescript.github.io/blog/2020/05/06/exception-encoding

Reviewer: Remove this, or change it to the canonical url on the bucklescript blog, if this post is planned to be published on both platforms

---

---

> title: Enhanced lazy encoding in BuckleScript

Reviewer: remove this entire frontmatter element (there's already a title on line 6)

---

> 

Reviewer: For stylistic / structural reasons, we need a level 2 header for the introduction text

```suggestion
## Introduction
```

Recently we made some significant improvements with our new encoding for lazy values, and we find it so exciting that we want to highlight the changes. The new encoding generates very idiomatic JS output like hand-written code.

For people who are not familiar with lazy evaluation, it is documented here: https://ocaml.org/releases/4.10/htmlman/expr.html#sss:expr-lazy.

> # What's the difference?

Reviewer: h1 headers are reserved for the title, the content does start with a level 2 header

```suggestion
## Comparison between the old and new lazy encoding
```

> Take this code snippet, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take an example, and see how the old encoding of a lazy value would look like:
```

> ```reasonml

Reviewer: we usually use `reason` or `re` for reason snippets... since we are using `reasonml` quite a lot in existing sources, I will add the `reasonml` keyword in the whitelist as well. Currently on it, we'll need to rebase on master in a minute

Reviewer: this is now fixed on master, as soon as you rebase it will build on our PR preview. Ignore my comment above and feel free to use `reasonml` from there on

let lazy1 = lazy {
    "Hello, lazy" -> Js.log;
     1
}; // create a lazy value

let lazy2 = lazy 3 ; // artifical lazy values for demo purpose

Js.log2 (lazy1, lazy2); // logging the lazy values

let (lazy la, lazy lb) = (lazy1, lazy2); // pattern match to force evaluation

Js.log2 (la, lb); // logging forced values
```

> Running this code in node, the output is as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When compiled and run in `node`, the runtime representation of our lazy values will look something like:
```

```bash
lazy_demo$node src/lazy_demo.bs.js 
[ [Function], tag: 246 ] 3 # logging the output of two lazy blocks
Hello, lazy # lazy1, laz2 evaluated forced by pattern match, hence logging
1 3 #logging the evaluated lazy block
```

> With the new encoding, the output is as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new encoding, the output of the same example code would look like this:
```

```bash
{ RE_LAZY_DONE: false, value: [Function: value] } { RE_LAZY_DONE: true, value: 3 } # logging block one with new encoding
Hello, lazy
1 3
```

As you can see, with the new encoding, no magic tags like 246  appear, and the lazy status is clearly marked via `RE_LAZY_DONE: (true | false) `.

> More than that, the generated code quality is also improved. In the old mode, the generated JS code was like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, the code quality of our generated `bs.js` files has also improved. Going back to our old version, the generated JS would look like this:
```

```js
var lazy1 = Caml_obj.caml_lazy_make((function (param) {
        console.log("Hello, lazy");
        return 1;
      }));

console.log(lazy1, 3);

var la = CamlinternalLazy.force(lazy1);

var lb = CamlinternalLazy.force(3);

console.log(la, lb);

var lazy2 = 3;
```

> In the new mode, it is simplified:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our new version with all the new changes to the lazy encoding, the output is way more simplified:
```

```js
var lazy1 = {
  RE_LAZY_DONE: false,
  value: (function () { // closure now is uncurried arity-0 function
      console.log("Hello, lazy");
      return 1;
    })
};

var lazy2 = {
  RE_LAZY_DONE: true,
  value: 3
};

console.log(lazy1, lazy2);

var la = CamlinternalLazy.force(lazy1);

var lb = CamlinternalLazy.force(lazy2);

console.log(la, lb);
```

## What changes did we make?

> In native, the encoding of lazy values is rather complicated: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the native runtime environment, the encoding of lazy values is rather complicated: 
```

- It is an array, which is not friendly for debugging in JS context.
- It has some special tags which are not meaningful, for example, magic number 246, in JS context.

> - It tries to unbox lazy values with the help of native GC. However, such complexity does not pay off in JS since the JSVM does not expose its GC semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It tries to unbox lazy values with the help of the native garbage collector (GC). However, this behavior does not make sense in a JS runtime environment since the JSVM does not expose its GC semantics. Keeping that behavior would only introduce more complexity for the JS side.
```

> So in the master, our encoding scheme is much simplified to take advantage of JS as much as possible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So in our current master branch, we drastically simplified our lazy encoding scheme to optimize for the JS runtime as much as possible:
```

- The encoding is uniform; it is always an object of two key value pairs. One is `RE_LAZY_DONE` to mark its status, 
the other is either a closure or an evaluated value.

> - The compiler optimization still kicks in at compile time: if it knows a lazy value is already evaluated or does not need to be evaluated, it will promote its status to be 'done'. However, unlike native, unboxing is not happening. This makes sense since the most interesting unboxing scenario happens in runtime instead of compile time where it is impossible in JSVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The compiler optimization still kicks in at compile time: if it knows a lazy value is already evaluated or does not need to be evaluated, it will promote its status to be 'done'. However, unlike in a native environment, unboxing is not happening. This makes sense since the most interesting unboxing scenarios only happen during runtime and not during compile time (a scenario which is impossible in the JSVM).
```

Reviewer: I am not entirely sure what `However, unlike in a native environment, unboxing is not happening` means, so i kept it as is

Author: in native, `lazy 3` is represented as 3

> With the new encoding, `lazy` has a much nicer sugar, and we encourage you to use it whenever it is convenient!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new encoding, `lazy` is now way more viable for JS usage, so we encourage our users to use it whenever it is convenient! We will also provide some more details about the `lazy` values in our documentation soon.
```

> # Caveats:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Caveats:
```
